this is one birds repeated tracks in
blew up the first five routes at this
bird took home from a release site about
ten kilometers from home and you can see
that they wind around in different
directions gets home but it's not very
much of a beeline in red are its final
five of a long training series after a
certain amount of time which is usually
some between five and ten flights the
bird locks on to a habitual preferred
route and it just sticks to that group
religiously so we're pretty certain that
this means that they are following a
chain of landmarks these things may
memorizing the routes simplify sirs so
we now know how pigeons navigate their
immediate surroundings by using features
like roads and rivers but their ability
to find their way home from hundreds
sometimes thousands of miles is still a
subject of furious debate some people
say it like is their sight oh they smell
to be on shoppings magnetic fields of
the earth in the Sun that's how they
navigate that's how I believe mainly we
think that pigeons have two basic
compasses one is based on the position
of the Sun but sometimes the Sun is not
available and then pigeons can still get
home this means they mask shifting is in
another compass and we think that other
compasses based on the Earth's magnetic
field but it doesn't matter how many
compasses you have unless you know where
you are to begin with you won't know
which direction to take so how does our
humble pigeon do that that's a good
question
this is much more mysterious there's one
very surprising theory which appears to
be the best supported by the evidence
and that is that birds use their sense
of smell to provide them with a broad
scale map of their unfamiliar
environment so here's how it works our
bird knows that to the north of his loft
is a field of daisies and to the east is
a glue factory called Bowie once he's
released in an unfamiliar territory he
has a good sniff he can smell the
daisies and the wind is blowing in a
southwesterly direction so he knows the
loft is to the north easy